In the previous videos, we created our
first hello world Android application
and then I showed you how to set up and
configure a virtual device or emulator.
So now it's time to run the application
on the AVD. Now you'll find out
about virtual devices emulators and avds
throughout the course and use the terms
interchangeably,
strictly speaking emulator refers to the
software that the virtual device is
running inside but we're not really
interested in that level of detail, using
an emulator to run a virtual device is a
way to get the Android operating system
running on your computer so that you can
run programs on it as though it were a
real device and it's very handy if you
haven't got a physical device and also
lets you test on different Android
versions just by creating a new AVD so
we're going to run the hello world
application on an Android virtual device.
Now you should have Android studio
running as I've got and the hollow world
application opened Android studio keeps
a track of the last few projects that
you've worked on so you can just click
on hello world on the left hand side of
the welcome screen to load the project
if it's not already opened. Now we saw
one way to start an emulator in the
previous video from the tools menu
I chose Android and then AVD manager and
now from the AVD manager click the green
triangle next to the virtual device that
you want to start, I'm going to click on
that now and you've got a slow computer
it's probably a good idea to start the
virtual device before you actually need
it you can leave it loading together
with your work and you can also close
down the Android virtual device manager
before the emulator has fully loaded you
don't need to wait for it to fully load.
Now when the emulator has fully started
you're ready to use it to run your app
and you can see that it's started now so
I'm gonna switch back to Android studio
now to run our app there's several ways
the obvious way to run is to go to the
run menu and select run up there before
I click that phone notice the green
arrow up here there's also another green
arrow up on the toolbar as well, so we
could choose that as well and get that
to run that way instead so I'm going to
click on this one neither one would work
so the next thing it needs to know is
what do we want to
run this on. Now because I've already
started an emulator it appears at the
top here on the connected devices any
emulators that are running as well as
any physical devices that are plugged
into the computer should appear here and
you can just choose the one you want to
use. Now this also integrates quite
nicely with the AVD manager so that
system images that you've set up from
there will appear in the available and
emulators section which will show up if
there are extra ones and you can create
a new emulator here if you like using
the button at the bottom and it just
launches the AVD manager so it's
probably not often that you want to use
this button more useful is that you can
choose an emulator that isn't running
and start up from here and I'm going to
be doing that next,
for now though we've already got an
emulator started so I'm just going to
select the one or lengthen so I
currently selected at the top and click
on ok then I'm going to tab over to my
emulator and you see down the bottom
we've got some things happening that
Gradle build running eventually we
should see the app start in the emulator
there were previous versions of Android
studio before version 2.2 you used to
open up the run pane automatically then
switch to the Android monitor pane once
the app started running, but the first
event draw studio I'm using to record
this video doesn't do that but they may
have put that feature back in again in
the future the Android monitor pane has
also been renamed to log cat, I suppose
that's not surprising
because everyone referred to a less the
logcat anyway. Now you can see that the
app is now started and it is worth
having a look at these panes when you
run an app, so I'm gonna open up the run
pane over here and click on that and you
can see the commands that it used to
deploy the app to the phone and start it
running and if you've played around with
AVB to reach your device and install
apps on it and this may all look very
familiar but if it doesn't make much
sense then don't worry about it it's not
something you need to know how to do
because Android studio runs the ADB
commands for you. ADB by the way
stands for Android debug bridge and
that's the method used to communicate
with an Android device when developing,
we're going to be looking at these
commands in a later section and we'll
set up ADB and have a look at some of
the things that you can do with it, the
only reason you'd be interested in this
pane at the moment though is if
something goes wrong, you can then either
google the error message or ask a
question in the Q&A
section of this course and paste the
contents of that screen into your
question though the logcat screen is a
little bit more interesting, so I'm going
to click on that but it's also scary
because a lot seems to be happening I'm
not going to talk about it right at this
moment because we've missed most of the
excitement so I'm going to come back to
the logcat shortly, so firstly we go back
to our emulator tab over we can see the
hello world program app running on this
emulator. Now it looks just like a
physical Android device with the home
button etc at the bottom in our app
running in the window our simple app
doesn't do a great deal but that's just
how you can test your app using an
emulator, so I can close the app using
the back button and just like on a
physical device when you install apps
from the Play Store there's an icon to
launch hello world from the devices apps
menu, so if I click on that you can see
we've got our holo world up there I can
click on that to start it you may have
noticed some activity down here in this
lock kept poem or all that was going on
so let's actually have a look at that
and so that we can see that all from the
start I will just shut down this
emulator and we'll start it back up
again using the other method I mentioned.
You can stop the emulator by either
holding down this power button here
holding down the button and powering off
but you also close it by clicking on
this little X button down here, either
way well actually close down the
emulator. Alright so now instead of
starting an emulator first I'm just
going to run the program. Now if you've
got a fast computer with loads of RAM
there's no need to start an emulator
first in the button bar at the top of
the screen there's a green arrow that
you can use to run your app like I
clicked earlier you'll do that again and
when I've clicked that it asks for an
emulator or device to run on and that's
the same screen we saw earlier but now
there's no running devices connected
devices is a nun we've got available
virtual devices showing the nexus 5x API
26, eventually when that's loaded the
application will automatically start and
I've got the logcat showing on the
screen here as you can see so we should
be able to see things happening here if
that does as that does start, now I
say should be able to, the log cat
often hangs on the emulator that you've
just closed so it might be showing us
disconnected or just generally not
dating it doesn't seem to be doing much
of the way of updating here in the or so
you can see and this is the disconnected
here that I'm referring to in this in
the drop down window I'm gonna change
that to select a new emulator click on
that select a new emulator and then
we'll be good to go and as we get new
messages and as we do things on the
computer that will then be updated and
showing the logcat, you can see that as
I'm doing things were getting entries in
there start color world again there's
generally a lot going on in the logcat
and what we might do is just to see that
in full glory we'll close this down
power it off and then we'll start it
again and you'll be able to see the
emulator and all the various messages
that's at the moment you can see it says
disconnected so I'm gonna start that again
I'm gonna come down here straight away
give it a second to start and select no
filters over here and you feel good
absolutely everything quite a bit of
information as you can see there and
this is what I was talking about before
you can see some some of the messages
have got a i in a slash at the beginning
information messages you can see others
I've got a w/ for warning and e/ for error
there's also color coded as well. Now the
logcat clears itself as our app launches
each time so if I go back and actually
select our app show only selected
application there's currently nothing so
they'll be little to nothing showing and
that's because this app is a bit too
simple to long much of interest and in
fact as you can see in my case it's have
to absolutely blink at the moment now
we're gonna be looking at a log cat in
more detail a bit later,
we've actually got some more log entries
to see but now though I just want you to
be aware that it's there if you get
properly to wrap if they crash you'll
find a crash report in the log cat and
you can copy that in the same way as
your copy text in the Edit window and
paste them into the QA section of this
course along with your question now it
may not mean much to you at first but
it'll be very useful to us when working
out why your app crashes so the emulator
overall does a pretty good job of
showing what your application will look
like and you'll be seeing that in
operations a lot more as we go through
the course, that's because it's one of
the core things that I recommend you do
to be testing your applications as much
as possible and seeing what they look
like on the screen now certainly
recommend that you test a final version
of an application on a physical device
before you upload it to the place to
but for testing purposes the emulators
are great, they also allow you to test on
the different versions of Android that
your app supports without you having to
go out and buying loads of Android
phones and tablets so it's a great way
to get a feel for what your application
is going to look like before it goes
into production and before you test it
on a physical device so that's testing
on an emulator if you can run them
they're a great help if you do have
problems running emulators because your
machine doesn't have enough memory then
you can run all the apps in this course
on a real Android device though so don't
be too put off if you can't run an
emulator Android devices are also fairly
cheap these days, so it can be a very
inexpensive way to test on a really
Android device if you've got problems
using emulators. Alright so I'm going
to end the video now in the next video
we're going to fire up one of my Android
devices when X is 5x and run the app on
the physical machine just to show you
what it looks like on that and how to
use it on a real device, so I'll see you
in the next video.